Update why_mf_next.md (#607)
unicode-org/message-format-wg: docs/why_mf_next.md

- `MessageFormat` is the Unicode API for software localization
- It is 20 years old, well designed, proven solution

> - Its design is optimized for the software development model of 20y ago,
>   and implementers struggle with its shortcomings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Its design was optimized for the software development model
of twenty years ago.
Implementers, developers, and translators struggle with its shortcomings.
```

and are unprepared to handle changes
(think localization tools, linters, friendly UIs, etc.).

> The most basic functionality would be adding a new formatter.
> There are a relatively small number of supported formatters, while over the years ICU
> added other formatters: date and time intervals, measurement units, lists, person names, and many others. 
> But MessageFormat did not keep up. And adding support for any of these new formats risks to break
> existing tools.

Reviewer: This paragraph is difficult to read and less clear than it needs to be.

```suggestion
The most basic functionality would be adding a new formatting function.
MessageFormat 1.0 only supported a small number of basic formatting functions,
while over the years ICU added many new capabilities: date and time intervals,
measurement units, lists, person names, and many more.
Developers also sometimes want to define their own formatting functions.
Supporting additional formats risks breaking interoperability or compatibility
with existing tools.
```

### 1.2. Can't deprecate anything, even if now we know better

ICU is old, but also very popular (right now it is the core i18n library
for all major operating systems, browsers, and many other products).

> This is how it has both numeric and named parameters, allows partial strings in
> plural / select (technically concatenation, which is bad i18n), uses date / time
> patterns (bad i18n, when skeletons are the better way), has nesting selectors,
> and unfriendly escaping (think doubling the apostrophe `''` ), `#` in plurals.

Reviewer: Translation into English:

```suggestion
As a result of its age and design, MessageFormat 1.0 has both numeric (positional)
 and named parameters.
It still provides date and time patterns (picture strings), when skeletons or option
bags provide far superior results.
It allows selectors (such as plural and select) around only part of the overall message,
which is a form of non-internationalized string concatenation.
```

  grammatical agreement requires words outside select / plural to change.
  See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agreement_(linguistics)
- Patterns in the date / time / number placeholders are bad i18n, should use skeletons

> - No official support for gender. It can be done with `select`, but that has problems for localization tooling:
>   strings can't account for the difference in gender categories across languages, and there are no standard “enum” identifiers:
>   developers use masculine/feminine, masc/fem, male/female, etc.

Reviewer: This has: double colons: and needs more work. Also, we don't support gender in 2.0-45 either.

```suggestion
- Unable to support gender selection. 
  Using existing formatters such as `select` doesn't account
  for the grammatical needs of different gender categories across languages.
  Tools have no way to know what modifications are needed
  and developers have to understand the needs of current and future languages to succeed.
```

Author: > Unable to support gender selection. 
That is misleading, because people do use select for gender support. It just supports is badly!
Suggest:

Gender selection is badly supported.

- Formatting for “literals” known at compile time.

>   For example, literal numbers in a message need to be adjusted for the user's preferences for native vs ASCII digits and format.

Reviewer: I don't understand what this is supposed to represent?

Author: This the case where you have Arabic *literal* text in "There are 98 departments" (note no input placeholders). There is no way in MF1.0 to change the 98 to Arabic numerals (from ASCII) according to user preferences.

Author: I didn't understand the original text, so tried to reformulate it into something that made sense to me.

Author: That was the line "Formatting for “parameters” known at compile time"

Author: If you have suggested for clarity ... Or we could just delete "Formatting for “parameters” known at compile time" and not replace by "Formatting for "literals"..."

Reviewer: I think we should just remove this item.

Author: done

### 2. Some existing problems

- ICU added new formatters, but MessageFormat does not support them
- Messages with selectors (`select` and/or `plural`) are difficult to create
  and edit because of the complex nesting requirements of the syntax.

> - `select` and `plural` placeholders inside a message are difficult to translate as

Author: ```suggestion
- `select` and `plural` placeholders inside a message are difficult to translate as
  grammatical agreement may require words _outside_ the `select`/`plural` to change.
```
Remove this item since it is covered above. (I wouldn't weigh too heavily on this, as systems can enforce "no select on parts", as Google does.)

Reviewer: They aren't the same thing. Nesting happens when you don't do select on parts but do have multiple selection. Coupled with the need to "explode" plurals, things can get messy. (At Amazon we used our resource format to break up the nesting, making it easier to write).

This second bullet is about naive use of MF1 (avoiding nesting works in English, but doesn't translate). You or I can enforce this in our own tooling, but MF1 itself does not.

In any case, I think this is fine?

Author: Ok for now, thanks.

### 3. Hard to map to the existing localization core structures

> The format is not easy to support in localization tooling.

Reviewer: No. This is precisely the opposite of what the rest of the paragraph says (and is not correct anyway).

```suggestion
While MessageFormat 1.0 and its syntax are widely supported by runtime environments,
the same cannot be said for localization tooling.

The root cause of that is not it is difficult to parse.
Because it is not. And ICU4J has public API for parsing.

Most translation tools take a string (with placeholders) in a source language
and give back a translated string, usually with the same placeholders
(with some degree of flexibility).

> It requires that the translation software expand plurals, where the input
> has (for example) 2 “message variants” (English, singular / plural),
> but the message presented to a Arabic translator needs 6 message variants.

Reviewer: This change makes the text less clear.

```suggestion
To get the right results, translation software needs to understand the message syntax.
For example, it needs to adjust the number of translated "patterns" to match the
grammatical needs of the target language.
Where the English input might have only two patterns (singular and plural),
the Arabic translator needs to supply six message variants,
and the Japanese translator only one.
```

### 4. Designed to be API only, plain text, UI, “imperative style”

The main (only?) use case for `MessageFormat` is: load the string from resources,
The typical use case for `MessageFormat` is: load the string from resources,
replace placeholders, and return the string result with placeholders replaced. \
An i18n-aware `printf`, basically.

It does not play well with binding, formatting tags (think `html`),
It does not account for formatting tags (think `html`),
or “document-like” content (for example templating systems like
[freemarker](https://freemarker.apache.org/),
[mustache](https://mustache.github.io/), even JSP, PHP, etc.)

Because it is API only it has no standard way to store the stings in a
serialized format and to carry info or directives for translators or
localization tools. \
So there is no way for a message to reference another message, or to fallback
to a different locale. That is all left to the "host resource manager"

> (whatever that is for the given tech stack)

Reviewer: I agree about the first part.

I'm not sure I agree about the second part, which is a description of resource management and/or resource files. There are lots of formatter adjacent things that are not in scope for MF2 itself (and which MF1 never pretended to solve). I can't use 'suggestion' to restore text, so will separately commit.

> (whatever that is for the given tech stack)

Author: I think the first can be restored, but should be changed. There is a standard string serialization defined by the API, used all the time. The point to make is that it doesn't the kinds of information needed, so people have developed non-interoperable wrappers for it.
OLD
Because it is API only it has no standard way to store the stings in a
serialized format and to carry info or directives for translators or
localization tools.
NEW
The format defined by the API provides no standard way to carry the necessary info or directives for translators or localization tools, so implementations have had to develop their own, with no interoperability.

> (whatever that is for the given tech stack)

Reviewer: I will add your text.

> (whatever that is for the given tech stack)

Author: Thanks

### 4. Designed to be API only, plain text, UI, “imperative style”

The typical use case for `MessageFormat` is: load the string from resources,
replace placeholders, and return the string result with placeholders replaced.
An i18n-aware `printf`, basically.

It does not account for formatting tags (such as HTML),
or “document-like” content (for example templating systems like
[freemarker](https://freemarker.apache.org/),
[mustache](https://mustache.github.io/), even JSP, PHP, etc.)

Because it is only an API, it has no standard way to store strings in a
serialized format or to carry information or directives for translators
or localization tools.

> There is also no metadata “packaging”: comments, length limits, example, links,

Author: This is a duplicate of the above; should be combined. (There are other duplicates in the text, mostly harmless and would take additional work to fix; given that we want to get this out pronto I didn't suggest changes.)
